The opening of this text makes me so mad.

Zygmunt Bauman (henceforth Zyggy) starts by calling up the image of a library. Libraries have sociology sections; people read books from them and use those books as inspiration for other works that may or may not eventually find themselves in the sociology section:

> Sociology, in this sense, is a space of continuous activity which combines learning with new experiences and expands knowledge, changing, in that process, the form and content of the discipline itself...

Good. Smiley face. Academic subjects are basically continuous process-networks comprising a constellation of methods and active pasts (shared field experience, bodies of knowledge, co-existence in the same milieus), united under an assumed identity which can be perverted and transcended through novel or interdisciplinary work; with this in mind, we can easily explain anthropological analyses of economic transactions, sociological analyses of hunter-gatherer cultures, economic analyses of ancient Rome... there's no mystery here, just a lot to explore and elucidate.

And then Zyggy cocks it up: 

> This process, however, doesn't allow us the possibility of knowing the object itself. We have to add a few questions: in what way is this object peculiar? In what way is it different from others, what justifies referring to it with a different name? If calling an animal a lion is correct but calling it a tiger is not, then there must be something lions have that tigers don't, there must be distinctions between them.

Zyggy's example, species, is highly demonstrative of the problem I have with this reasoning. A species is not in fact a "kind of thing" in the most contemporary discourses on biology (or at least those I'm keen on); rather, a species is *a thing all its own* which specific animals take part in, as a cell takes part in the broader organism. The coherence of that broader thing is maintained by the power of members of the species to act as a reproductive community (if only potentially); the lines of species break not on the basis of morphology or shared characteristics, but rather a most functional and continuous virtual interoperation between the members, i.e., the process which Zyggy is now repudiating in favor of "the object itself". 

I couldn't care less what precisely makes some analysis or other sociological, except insofar as an investigator finds traces of past activity in a space that she can decode, follow, and exploit; what traces does what is called sociological thought leave, what does it do? Zyggy then makes the dazzling claim that `there is no difference in the manner with which the task of specialists, as well as their trademark—academic responsibility—is understood and practiced [...] [specialists] observe aspects of human action or employ historical evidence and tries to interpret them according to methods of analysis coherent with that task.`

I don't care how many similarities you can stack up (not that these are even found in all areas of e.g. statistical economics), you don't get to jump in with So They Are Actually The Same unless they're exhaustive. *The process is not the same,* it's often the most striking and *useful* thing to distinguish; there are extremely different methods and perspectives of analysis distributed between the various fields of social science. So what distinction does Zyggy make?

> [...] it's in the kinds of question that motivate each field, that is, those that determine the points of view (cognitive perspectives) by which human action is [...] explained...
>
> In [Economics], what is taken into consideration moves towards the relationship between benefit and cost in human action, evaluated within the perspective of the management of scarce resources and the possible ways to maximize profits. In addition, the relationships between actors are examined as aspects of production and exchange of goods and services, all regulated by market relations of supply and demand... 

Notice how quickly he has to appeal to method in his description of "the object". Zyggy's initial claim that specialists are working on essentially the same task comes across as very half-hearted; I understand what he's trying to do, though. The space of possible objects of study could easily include dimensions for the specific aspects of phenomena being investigated, something that's quite hard to separate from method. But that's the thing: all initial motivations, insofar as they're actually expressed in a body of work, lead to differences in the process. The process gives rise to analyses, which are then subjected to a broadly similar (not really) process of academic review. The initial incident of the "sociological question" gives rise to sociological ways of thinking, a whole toolbox of methods which, in the fuzzy environment of the social sciences, will inadvertently be applied to a wide variety of different contexts. For good or ill. My view is that differences in question seem fuzzy and irrelevant when compared to the actual, gears-level distinctions in day-to-day practice. They mostly serve to give the field a name. There's nothing more worthless than a name.

