[Peter Singer's Master's Thesis, “Why Should I Be Moral”.](https://minerva-access.unimelb.edu.au/handle/11343/35543) It goes into multiple answers to that question, how they seem to fail, and also I've skipped most of it. I recommend using some form of contrast-enhancing method if you want to touch this, though most of the actual text of it is a lot better than the first many pages. He has grown past his view here to [some extent](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W3BmxyA3QPQ).

He cites (p.160) Phillipa Foot (Moral Beliefs) on the self-interested case for “being just”:

> Philosophers often speak as if a man could thus hide himself even from those around him, but the supposition is doubtful, and in any case the price in vigilance would be colossal. If he lets even a few people see his true attitude, he must guard himself against them; if he lets no one into the secret, he must always be careful, in case the least spontaneity betray him. Such facts are important because the need a man has for justice in dealings with other men depends on the fact that they are men and not inanimate objects or animals. If a man only needed other men as he needs household objects, and if men could be manipulated like household objects, or beaten into a reliable submission like donkeys, the case would be different (p.103)

I think there are significant flaws in Foot's reasoning if we're to apply it to some universal reading of the human subject, but Singer's critique seems to me interestingly flawed:

> Unsurprisingly, Foot fails to prove her paradoxical position. The flaw in this passage may be located in the word 'had', in 'he had good reason'. If 'had' is taken to refer to some time in the past, before the man could foresee that he would ever get into a situation in which justice would bring disaster upon him, he may, like everyone else, have had good reason to be just. But if 'had' is intended to refer to the time immediately before he died, when he knew that justice would lead to his death, he could not possibly have had good reason, of the sort adduced by Foot, for continuing to be just. Now that he is faced with death if he continues to be just, he is aware tnat his own case does differ relevantly from that of other men. One of the premises on which he based his decision to be just has turned out to be false.

It seems plain to me that the kind of thing Foot is talking about isn't so passive to this kind of re-evaluation. While I'd agree with Singer that it's unlikely most people would die for justice if they had any choice in it, I'd argue that's because they haven't become so virtuous that they'd lay down their lives for the sake of justice. If they really had dedicated their lives to cultivating a real, absolute commitment to virtue, they wouldn't easily be able to reconsider their premises in this manner. This is because the kind of thing Foot is talking about isn't a set of practices or principles for actions. Rather, it's a way of thinking and being, something that is impressed upon and instantiated by the subject's internal structure, the very structure which compels agency. A subject who, in some formative moment, decides to live an extremely virtuous life for essentially self-interested reasons (believing the expected reward for this is high) must be embarking on a journey of _self-modification_ to reap the full benefits of virtue as described by Foot. They simply could not, without great talent in compartmentalization and deception, live the life of a fully realized, full-throated, honest, extreme moralist while still keeping the ability to “defect” at any time.

Of course, it isn't at all settled that self-interest compels the kind of commitment to justice that Foot describes. It's likely that most people benefit from being somewhat virtuous, but not virtuous unto death, and most people do some amount of compartmentalization and deception. Many types of person will likely benefit very little from virtue due to their personal dispositions or context; Singer himself gives the example of happy egoistic sociopaths.

#philosophy #peter-singer #antihumanism